 Accounting Theory: Conceptual Issues
in a Political and Economic Environment
                       Statement of Cash Flows



Contributors: By: Harry I. Wolk, James L. Dodd & John J. Rozycki
Book Title: Accounting Theory: Conceptual Issues in a Political and Economic Environment
Chapter Title: "Statement of Cash Flows"
Pub. Date: 2017
Access Date: September 13, 2018
Publishing Company: SAGE Publications, Inc
City: Thousand Oaks
Print ISBN: 9781483375021
Online ISBN: 9781506300108
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781506300108.n13
Print pages: 375-409
                     ©2017 SAGE Publications, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
This PDF has been generated from SAGE Knowledge. Please note that the pagination of
the online version will vary from the pagination of the print book.
SAGE                                                                               SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.



Statement of Cash Flows

Learning Objectives

After reading this chapter, you should be able to:

    Understand the basic construction of the statement of changes in financial position.
    Understand the motivation for the FASB ' s move from the statement of changes in
    financial position to the cash flow statement.
    Understand the requirements of the cash flow statement and the nonarticulation problem
    that arises when using the indirect method.
    Comprehend the classification problems that exist in the FASB ' s trichotomy of operating,
    investing, and financing activities.
    Appreciate the analytical usefulness of the cash flow statement for different users.
    Understand the importance and usefulness of free cash flow.


The opening setting of Meredith Willson ' s popular musical The Music Man is a passenger
car of a train bound for River City, Iowa, sometime during the early 20th century. Several
salesmen are found advocating cash terms of sale.1 “Cash for the merchandise, cash for the
button hooks. . . . Cash for the crackers and the pickles and the flypaper.” The salesmen had
it right. Ultimately, bills, investments, debts, dividends, and so on are paid with cash, not
earnings. If a firm does not generate sufficient cash in the course of its business, it faces
extinction. It is that simple. What is not so simple is the best way of conveying a firm ' s
historical cash flows to users. The good news is that we have made significant progress over
the past 40 years. The bad news is that we have more work to do.

In 1971, the Accounting Principles Board (APB) mandated the Statement of Changes in
Financial Position (SCFP) for financial reporting.2 This “funds flow” statement reported
changes in assets, liabilities, and owners ' equity account balances. In 1987, the Financial
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) mandated a statement of cash flows (SCF) in SFAS No.
95.3 This statement superseded the SCFP. The transition from a funds flow statement to a
cash flow statement reflected the FASB ' s interest in cash-basis reporting as an important
supplement to the accrual-based income statement and balance sheet.

In the next section, we discuss the SCFP and the motivation and structure of the SCF. We
highlight two major problems: (1) the nonarticulation problem arising from usage of the
indirect method in the operating section of the SCF and (2) classification problems and
inconsistencies with the FASB ' s three-way classification within the SCF. Even though some
parts of the SCF are viewed to be more important than others, we emphasize that the SCF
should be considered in its entirety.

Subsequently, we introduce and explain the concept of free cash flow (FCF), a non-GAAP
measure that developed partially because of shortcomings in the SCF. We conclude with a
review of related theoretical and empirical research, and make recommendations for changes
to the SCF.

The Statement of Changes in Financial Position



Page 2 of 31                                                SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


To appreciate fully the significance of the statement of cash flows, it is necessary to
understand the structure and motivation of its predecessor, the Statement of Changes in
Financial Position.

The SCFP itself is successor to a prior financial statement, the funds flow statement. In a
funds flow statement, working capital accounts are defined as comprising the fund balance.
The purpose of this statement was to show how the fund balance accounts increased from
income and other sources and decreased from losses and other uses. The funds flow concept
represented the liquid and readily available resources of the firm.

APB Opinion No. 19 stated that the reporting objectives of the SCFP are to (a) complete the
disclosure of changes in financial position, (b) summarize financing and investing activity, and
(c) report funds flow from operations. The information from these three items cannot be
directly obtained from an income statement and comparative balance sheets because of the
manner in which data are aggregated. Thus, the SCFP provided a different way of classifying
and reporting accounting transactions than occurs in a balance sheet and income statement.
However, since it relies on definitions and measurements of accounting elements from the
other two financial statements, it can be described as a derivative financial statement. The
underlying logic is summarized as follows:

(13.1)



There are two balancing sections in the statement of changes in financial position. These are
called sources of resources and uses of resources, respectively. Sources of resources are
defined as transaction credits. These arise from increases in equities and decreases in assets.
Increases in equities reflect financing from external sources (e.g., debt and stock issues) as
well as internal sources (e.g., net income and proceeds from the disposal of assets).4

Uses of resources are defined as transaction debits. These arise from decreases in equities
and increases in assets. Decreases in equities reflect a reduction in the firm ' s financing,
including debt retirement, treasury stock purchases, dividend payments, and net losses.
Asset increases are uses of the firm ' s resources. In all cases, the firm ' s available resources
decrease because of debit transactions.

In both the sources and uses sections of the SCFP, transactions are classified into those
affecting the fund balance and those affecting other accounts. The effect of net income on the
fund balance is reported separately. The structure of the SCFP is illustrated in Exhibit 13.1,
which provides a system of classifying transaction debits and credits.5

Exhibit 13.1 Standard Format of the Statement of Changes in Financial Position
 Sources of Resources (transaction credits]

     1. Increases to the “fund balance” accounts
            a. From net income
            b. From other sources
     2. Other sources of resources
     3. Decrease, if any, in the fund balance for the period




Page 3 of 31                                                   SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


 Uses of Resources (transaction debits]

     1. Decreases to the “fund balance” accounts
            a. From net losses
            b. From other sources
     2. Other uses of resources
     3. Increase, if any, in the fund balance for the period


SCFP ' s predecessor, the funds flow statement, included only the transactions listed under
points 1a and 1b in Exhibit 13.1. Transactions not affecting fund accounts were excluded. The
result was a report on the change in fund balance and how this change came about. The
emphasis in funds flow reporting focused much more narrowly on liquidity. By adding the
transactions listed under point 2 in Exhibit 13.1, a comprehensive summary is made of all
changes in financial position, not just those pertaining to fund balance accounts. This
approach is referred to as the all-inclusive or all-resources SCFP. The types of transactions
listed under point 2 pertain to investment and financing activities not affecting fund accounts.
Examples include the conversion of convertible debt to common stock, stock issued for
nonmonetary assets, dividends paid in property rather than cash, and nonmonetary
exchanges of assets. APB Opinion No. 19 opted for the all-inclusive approach rather than the
narrower funds flow statement. However, it is apparent that a funds flow statement is still
contained within the SCFP.

As part of the preparation of the SCFP, it was necessary to define those balance sheet
accounts making up the fund balance accounts. APB Opinion No. 19 permitted any one of
four definitions: cash, cash plus near cash (short-term marketable securities and other
temporary investments), quick assets, and working capital, an example of flexibility. In any
case, all transactions in nonfund accounts are to be included in the statement of changes in
financial position. This is true even if the transactions have no direct effect on fund accounts.

When funds are defined as working capital, nonfund transactions are restricted to
nonmonetary transactions, such as nonmonetary exchanges of assets and the conversion of
convertible debt to common stock. Defining funds as cash leads to additional complications
as there are many accounting transactions that do not affect cash. This results in additional
nonfund transactions that need to be reported separately. Hence, a working capital definition
of funds minimized the cost of producing an SCFP. Given that APB Opinion No. 19 allowed
flexibility on this point, most firms elected to define funds as net working capital.

The recognition of the importance of the SCFP was gradual. In 1963, APB Opinion No. 3
recommended inclusion of an SCFP in the annual report.6 The Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) made it mandatory for statutory filings beginning in 1971.7 In response to
the SEC action, the APB issued APB Opinion No. 19 in 1971 and made the statement
mandatory for financial reporting.8

The Motivation for a Cash Flow Statement

What prompted the FASB to rediscover cash-basis accounting as an important supplement to
accrual-based financial statements, and why did cash flow supplant the more general
concept of funds flow and changes in financial position?9 During the FASB ' s deliberations


Page 4 of 31                                                   SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


that led to the adoption of the SCF, a consensus emerged that funds should be defined as
cash rather than as net working capital. Net working capital came to be viewed as a poor
measure of liquidity for three reasons. First, deferred charges and credits are included in net
working capital but have no cash flow consequences. Second, the conversion of current
assets into cash can take a year or longer for firms with a long operating cycle. And third,
items such as inventory are carried on a cost basis and thus do not explicitly measure the
cash flow potential of the inventory. In light of these ambiguities, cash flow reporting is
appealing because of its straightforwardness and literal interpretation ' cash is cash is cash.

Objectives of Financial Reporting

SFAC No. 1 lists three general objectives of financial reporting. The first of these is very broad
and states, “Financial reporting should provide information that is useful to present and
potential investors and creditors and other users in making rational investment, credit, and
similar decisions.”10 Two additional objectives can be thought of as specific ways of meeting
the first objective. These are (1) reporting information about the firm ' s net resources and
changes in those resources and (2) reporting information useful in assessing future cash
flows. In the 1980s these two reporting goals motivated the FASB ' s adoption of the SCF.

Objectives of the Statement of Cash Flows

In SFAC No. 5, the FASB makes the following claims about the SCF:

     It provides useful information about an entity ' s activities in generating cash through
     operations to repay debt, distribute dividends, or reinvest to maintain or expand
     operating capacity; about its financing activities, both debt and equity; and about its
     investing or spending of cash. Important uses of information about an entity ' s
     current cash receipts and payments include helping to assess factors such as the
     entity ' s liquidity, financial flexibility, profitability, and risk.11

An earlier FASB discussion memorandum suggested that cash flow data are a useful
supplemental disclosure because they do the following:

    1. Provide feedback on actual cash flows
    2. Help to identify the relationship between accounting income and cash flows
    3. Provide information about the quality of income
    4. Improve comparability of information in financial reports
    5. Aid in assessing flexibility and liquidity
    6. Assist in predicting future cash flows12

In one way or another, all of the preceding points deal with the limitations of accrual
accounting.13 This suggests that cash flow data can supplement the accrual data provided in
the income statement and balance sheet.

It is obvious that cash flow data are necessary in assessing past cash flows (point 1). It
follows that cash flow data are also necessary for understanding the cash flow that is
generated from operations (point 2).14 The third point, quality of income, is a term used by
financial analysts to describe the relationship between cash flow and accounting income. The
higher the correlation between accounting income and cash flows, the higher the quality of



Page 5 of 31                                                   SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                     SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


income. The quality-of-income concept reflects an awareness that accounting income
comprises many noncash accruals and deferrals and does not necessarily give a good
indication of liquidity.

The fourth point deals with the uniformity problem. Due to flexibility in the choice of some
accounting policies, comparability between companies may not be achieved. Many areas of
accounting fail to achieve uniformity. Cash flow from operations is subject to fewer arbitrary
choices of accounting policy. It is more uniform than income measurement and results in a
higher level of comparability. For this reason, the SCF has been advocated as a way of
dealing with the arbitrariness of income measurement. There is an appealing clarity and
directness to cash flow when contrasted with the abstractness of accounting income.15

The fifth point concerns the use of cash flow data to assist in assessing a firm ' s financial
flexibility and liquidity. Financial flexibility is the ability of the firm to adapt to new situations
and opportunities. Liquidity is the capability for quick conversion of assets to cash without
loss. Cash that is generated internally from operations gives an indication of both liquidity and
flexibility. Cash flow represents internal resources available for debt servicing and repayment,
new investment, and distributions to stockholders. This was the original reason for requiring a
funds flow statement.

Liquidity information is also contained in the balance sheet. However, the current – noncurrent
classification system in the balance sheet is a poor guide to liquidity. Some current items are
deferred charges or credits that have no impact on future cash flows. In addition, assets such
as inventory may not be readily converted into cash. Furthermore, within the current group of
assets, very few are actually convertible to cash within a short period. Finally, since the
attribute of measurement reported in the balance sheet is normally something other than net
realizable value, it is not possible to determine how much cash is generated by assets. In
essence, a balance sheet presents nothing more than a crude ranking of liquidity, and in its
present form it reveals very little about liquidity and flexibility. The SCF, on the other hand,
gives insight into the cash-generating potential of operations.

The exit-price accounting system illustrated in Appendix 1-A is intended to measure flexibility
of the firm in terms of the amount of cash that can be realized from nonforced liquidation of
assets.16 However, even exit-price measurement is only a crude indicator of liquidity and
flexibility. Although such a measurement system might provide an estimate of the cash
conversion value of a firm ' s resources, it is the speed of conversion that ultimately
determines both liquidity and flexibility. How useful exit-price accounting is for assessing a
firm ' s flexibility is therefore questionable. In addition, a firm is more likely to raise capital
incrementally rather than by selling all its assets. Normally, a firm does not sell its productive
assets to raise new capital for new investment opportunities. A firm is more likely to use either
new capital or cash realized from assets that are held for sale, such as inventories.

The sixth and final point suggests that cash flow data are useful for predicting future cash
flows. It makes sense that past cash flow data are useful for predicting future cash flows.
However, it remains unsettled if cash flow, funds flow, or accounting income is the best
predictor of future cash flows. It is also unclear what the prediction period should be. Holding
aside the question of costs, the expanded disclosure philosophy maintains that firms should
disclose all potentially useful information.

Requirements of the Cash Flow Statement


Page 6 of 31                                                     SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                   SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.



Structure of the SCF

The SCFP used a very general “sources and uses” of funds framework. This binary framework
focuses mechanically on the narrow accounting debit – credit relation illustrated in Exhibit
13.1. In contrast, the SCF classifies cash receipts and payments into more meaningful
categories relating to operating, financing, and investing activities.

Cash is defined as literal cash on hand or on-demand deposit, plus cash equivalents. Cash
equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments, which are convertible into known
amounts of cash. Like APB Opinion No. 19, the SCF requires all noncash investing and
financing transactions to be reported as a supplement to the SCF, either in a schedule or in a
narrative format. This approach represents the all-inclusive or all-resources concept of funds
flow reporting. It presumably assures that all of the firm ' s transaction debits and credits are
accounted for and presented in the SCF. An example of the suggested format is illustrated in
Exhibit 13.2.

In the SCF, cash flows are segregated into those stemming from operating activities, investing
activities, and financing activities. This organization provides more classificational consistency,
which leads to greater comparability than the SCFP (see note 5 of this chapter). However,
three of the seven members of the FASB dissented from the statement. They maintained that
interest and dividends received arise from investing activities rather than from operating
activities, as stated in paragraph 22 of the standard. This is in line with current thinking in the
finance discipline. Similarly, interest paid is an element of financing activities rather than an
operating cost, as noted in paragraph 23 of Statement 95.17

SFAS 95 states that operating cash flows may be presented using either the direct or the
indirect method. The direct method reports literal cash flows related to income statement
classifications (revenues, cost of sales, etc.). By contrast, the indirect or reconciliation method
starts with accrual income and adjusts it for the associated noncash items. More information is
reported with the direct method, and the FASB favors it. However, in both the exposure draft
and the eventual accounting standard, the FASB acknowledged that the direct method can be
more costly, since not all companies organize their accounting records in such a way that
produces the necessary data. However, not mentioned by the FASB, in actual practice there is
usually a plug number somewhere in the SCF to make the numbers balance when using the
indirect method.

If the direct method is used, a separate schedule reconciles net operating cash flow with net
income, as illustrated in Exhibit 13.3. Thus, the indirect or reconciliation method must be used
either alone or as a supplement to the direct method. Several members of the FASB believe
that allowing the use of the indirect method impedes user understanding and diminishes the
quality of financial reporting.18

Exhibit 13.3 also shows the supplemental schedule of noncash investing and financing
activities required whether the direct or the indirect method is the primary vehicle for
displaying net cash from operating activities.

Exhibit 13.2 Illustration of the SCF in Accordance With SFAS No. 95 (Direct Method)
COMPANY M
 CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS



Page 7 of 31                                                   SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


 FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2000
 Increase (Decrease) in Cash and Cash Equivalents
 Cash flows from operating activities
 Cash received from customers                                                $13,850
 Cash paid to suppliers and employees                                        (12,000)
 Dividend received from affiliate                                            20
 Interest received                                                           55
 Interest paid (net of amount capitalized)                                   (220)
 Income taxes paid                                                           [325)
 Insurance proceeds received                                                 15
 Cash paid to settle lawsuit for patent infringement                         (30)
 Net cash provided by operating activities                                   $1,365
 Cash flows from investing activities
 Proceeds from sale of facility                                              $6,001
 Payment received on note for sale of plant                                  150
 Capital expenditures                                                        (1,000)
 Payment for purchase of Company S, net of cash acquired                     (925)
 Net cash used in investing activities                                       $(1,175)
 Cash flows from financing activities
 Net borrowings under line-of-credit agreement                               $300
 Principal payments under capital lease obligation                           (125)
 Proceeds from issuance of long-term debt                                    400
 Proceeds from issuance of common stock                                      500
 Dividends paid                                                              (200)
 Net cash provided by financing activities                                   $875
 Net increase in cash and cash equivalents                                   $1,065
 Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year                              600
 Cash and cash equivalents at end of year                                    $1,665
Exhibit 13.3 Indirect or Reconciliation Method of Presenting Net
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
 Reconciliation of net income to net cash provided by operating
 activities
 Net income
 Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
 operating activities:
                                                           $44
 Depreciation and amortization                                 $760
                                                           5
 Provision for losses on accounts receivable               200


Page 8 of 31                                               SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.



 Gain on sale of facility                                     (80)
 Undistributed earnings of affiliate                          (25)
 Payment received on installment note receivable for sale
                                                              100
 of inventory
 Change in assets and liabilities net of effects from purchase of
 Company S
 Increase in accounts receivable                              (215)
                                                                             Increase in      (2
 Decrease in inventory                                        205
                                                                             prepaid expenses 5)
 Decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses            (250)
 Increase in interest and income taxes payable                50
 Increase in deferred taxes                                   150
 Increase in other liabilities                                50
 Total adjustments                                                   $605
                                                                     $1,36
 Net cash provided by operating activities
                                                                     5
                                                                     $1,58
 Fair value of assets acquired
                                                                     0
 Cash paid for the capital stock                                     (950)
 Liabilities assumed                                                 $630

The great majority of American firms use the indirect method. It appears that preparers are
influenced by the cost issue, given their very strong preference for the indirect method. Both
methods result in the same cash flow from operations number. The information in arriving at
this number, however, differs: (a) cash flow numbers for sales, cost of goods sold, and the
like, versus (b) a reconciliation adjusting accrual accounting income to its cash flow analog.
The issue involved is one of costs versus benefits of information. There is a limited amount of
empirical research indicating that the direct method is preferred to the indirect, particularly by
outside users. In a study involving 282 respondents who were financial analysts, investment
advisers, accounting professors, and “accountants,” McEnroe found that 56% favored the
direct method as opposed to 44% favoring the indirect method.19 We see the direct method
as producing an operating activities section that is easy to understand, but difficult to prepare.
The indirect method is just the opposite, easy to prepare, but more difficult to understand.

The Nonarticulation Problem

There is an important problem that surfaced relative to the indirect method. An extensive
study by Bahnson, Miller, and Budge found that where the indirect method is employed in
determining cash flow from operations, nonarticulation occurs when the cash flows arising
from the changes in the working capital accounts of consolidated enterprises are not equal to
the working capital adjustments listed in the operations section of the SCF.20 Nonarticulation
can create confusion in understanding the underlying numbers in the operating section of the
SCF because it appears to make the SCF inconsistent with the underlying balance sheet.
Furthermore, these discrepancies occurred in 75% of the situations covered in the


Page 9 of 31                                                   SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


researchers ' sample.

We might add that the discrepancies are not trivial. As an example, in Exhibit 13.4, we
calculated the change in the balance sheet accounts for accounts receivable, inventories, and
accounts payable for 3M Company and compared those changes to the working capital
adjustments provided in the SCF. Note especially the percentage difference for accounts
receivable. We actually observed instances in which even the signs are different.

One important reason for nonarticulation is due to acquisitions of subsidiaries during the year.
When a firm acquires a subsidiary, beginning-of-year working capital balances of acquired
firms are not included in beginning consolidated balance sheets. To articulate, these missing
balances have to be included in the beginning-of-year balances for the consolidated firm.

Exhibit 13.4 Comparison of Balance Sheet Changes and Working Capital Adjustments for 3M
Company ($000,000)




In addition to nonarticulation caused by mid-year acquisitions, nonarticulation is also caused
by transactions involving working capital accounts that do not affect cash. These types of
transactions affect nonconsolidated firms as well as consolidated ones. Some examples of
these kinds of transactions include the following:

    Write-ups or write-downs of working capital items ' typically inventories ' when firms are
    acquired by purchase
    Depreciation allocations within manufactured inventories
    Any type of reclassification of working capital accounts between current and noncurrent
    categories21

Finally, nonarticulation can occur when one accounts payable account is used for the
purchase of both working capital assets (e.g., inventories, prepaids) as well as for the
purchase of non-working capital assets (e.g., equipment, land, patents). For example, the
purchase of inventory on account is an operating activity. It leads to an increase in accounts
payable and to a positive (cash inflow) working capital adjustment in the operating section of
the SCF. In contrast, the purchase of equipment on account is an investing activity. When the
SCF is constructed, the deferred payment for the equipment should be reflected in the
investing section. As such, the change in balance sheet accounts payable will not equal the
accounts payable adjustment in the operating section of the SCF.

As a part of the financial statement presentation project, in 2008 the FASB and IASB issued a
discussion paper proposing new presentation formats for the three financial statements. The
proposed changes are rather dramatic and they give management significantly more
discretion regarding classification of cash flows. The improvements in information content that
the proposed changes bring are questionable; however, its combination of operating and
activities into a single “business” classification has merit. This reduces the managers '
classification shifting between investing and operating activities that we have observed in


Page 10 of 31                                                SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.



recent years.22

Classification Problems of SFAS No. 95

In addition to three dissents by FASB members, significant questions were raised about the
structure of the SCF as specified by SFAS No. 95. Relative to the operating, financing,
investing trichotomy, Nurnberg states that this breakdown is in accordance with the finance
literature and is supposed to provide information that is useful for investment and credit
decisions.23 However, Nurnberg notes that the SCF classifies interest and dividend receipts
as operating inflows and interest payments as operating outflows. According to the finance
literature, these are investing activities in the former situation and financing activities in the
latter case.24

In SFAS No. 95, the FASB followed the income statement format with a proprietary orientation
' interest revenue and expense and dividend revenue as reflected as operating items. This
contrasts with showing these elements as investing activities (interest and dividend revenues)
or financing activities (interest expense) as in an entity theory approach. While the FASB may
have had a difficult choice between following the accounting income (proprietary theory)
approach and the finance orientation (entity theory), more practical considerations may have
influenced the FASB. Banking institutions favored classifying interest receipts and interest
payments as operating items ' which they may well be for banks ' to avoid reporting negative
cash flows from operations.25 Hence, maintaining consistency with the income statement as
well as the problem of the banking industry may have influenced the FASB ' s decision to split
interest expense (operations) and the receipt and repayment of principal (financing activities).

International Accounting Standards (IAS)

IAS 7 of the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) takes a flexible view toward
interest and dividends received or paid. They may be classified as operating, investing, or
financing cash flows, provided that they are classified consistently from period to period. The
treatment conflicts with the present proprietary orientation of SFAS No. 95 and the entity
theory approach suggested in this chapter and Chapter 12.

For banks, interest and dividends can be viewed as operating cash flows. If IAS 7 is changed
to allow this classification by banks, then the IASB has attained uniformity within industries.

Premium and Discount on Bonds and Notes

The split between interest and dividend revenues (operating) and purchasing stock of other
firms (investing) and borrowing or repaying principal (financing) leads to further problems. In
the case of bonds payable or long-term notes payable, the question arises as to how to
handle any discount or premium, which are interest adjustments but are part of principal
borrowed: a positive amount in the case of a premium or a shortfall in the case of a discount.

Vent, Cowling, and Sevalstad have found four ways to deal with this situation in published
annual reports.26 Consider a situation in which a firm issues four-year 8% coupon bonds with
a total face value (par value) of $10,000. The bonds are sold for $11,000 on December 31,
2000. For simplicity, assume straight-line amortization of the premium. Annual interest
expense is $550 ($800 minus $250 of premium amortization). The four methods are shown in


Page 11 of 31                                                  SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


Exhibit 13.5. Method 1 is probably the easiest to follow and is probably the one used with the
direct method. Notice that the sum of the operating flows does not equal the accrual
accounting interest expense because the $1,000 premium is part of the financing flow in the
year 2000. Methods 2 and 3 break out the premium from the investment flow and put it into
the operating flow category. Method 2 assigns the premium to the operations in the year of
payment, 2004, whereas Method 3 makes assignment in 2000, the year of issue. Method 4
allocates the premium over the life of the bonds.

Our preference is for Method 1 despite the lack of agreement between the accrual and cash
flow amounts. Method 4 makes the least sense because it allocates the premium over the four
years as a financing outflow (which it is not), thereby breaking up the annual cash flow from
2001 through 2004 into two $800 segments. While Method 1 is almost assuredly going to be
used with the direct method, Methods 1 – 3 are all possible under the indirect method. Notice
that we are dealing with yet another example of the allocation problem.

Munter raises several similar issues. If interest payments are capitalized in accordance with
the provisions of SFAS No. 34, they are excluded from operating activities and included in
investing activities as part of the acquisition costs of the fixed asset.27 This raises the
question of whether events should be classified by the basic nature of the receipt or
expenditure (interest payment) or on the basis of the ultimate purpose of the event (asset
acquisition).

A similar division arises in lease transactions with differences between capital leases and
operating leases.28 In the case of operating leases, the entire amount of the cash
expenditures is classified as a cash outflow deriving from operating activities. For capital
leases, the interest portion is classified as an operating activity, whereas the reduction of
principal portion is a financing activity. Whether the basic nature of the event or the ultimate
classification of the transaction should govern in the SCFs remains an unanswered question.

Exhibit 13.5 Premium Allocation Between Operating and Financing Cash Flowsa




Page 12 of 31                                                SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                 SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.




Increased Flexibility of Presentation

In SFAS No. 95, hedging activities are considered to be investing activities. The standard
presented a strict classification by the nature of the hedge transaction as an investment-type
transaction (the rigid uniformity concept).

In contrast, SFAS No. 104, which amends SFAS No. 95, allows association with the balance
sheet account specific to the hedge transaction. If it is identifiable with a particular balance
sheet item such as inventories (protecting against inventory price increases, for example),
SFAS No. 104 allows the hedge (forward contracts, futures contracts, and options or swaps)
to be classified either with that item on the balance sheet as an element of operations or as
an investing activity.29 Nurnberg and Largay believe that the increased flexibility in accounting
for hedge transactions in SFAS No. 104 generally leads to less comparability but may be
justified as an increase in “fineness” in some situations.30 See FASB Financial Standards
230.10.45 for current SCF requirements.

Analytical Usefulness of the Cash Flow Statement

Despite classification and nonarticulation problems, the SCF is clearly a very useful
statement. This is nicely demonstrated in a unique example of research by Ingram and Lee, in
which they use the income statement and the SCF together.31 They posited that over time,
growing firms have higher income and lower cash flows from operations. This is because
growing firms have increasing inventories and accounts receivable as they expand. To some
extent the inventories and receivables are offset by increases in payables, but the net effect of
the growth in working capital is that each year, the change in income exceeds the change in
operating cash flows in actual and most likely relative terms. Furthermore, as a firm expands,


Page 13 of 31                                                 SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


there are net investment outflows as fixed assets are acquired and cash inflows from
financing and new debt and equity are floated while dividends remain low or nonexistent.

For a firm that is contracting (becoming smaller), the relationships largely run in reverse; sales
and income decline but operating cash flows usually increase as accounts receivable and
inventory are lowered. In addition, cash outflows for investment decline. Similarly, in the
financing category, cash outflows increase as stock repurchases (treasury stock), debt
retirements, and cash dividends increase.

Notice the similarity between Ingram and Lee ' s work and the use of cash flows and accruals
for predictive purposes. Ingram and Lee ' s statistical analysis, which involved almost 1,000
firms over the period 1974 to 1992, largely supported their deductive analysis. Consistent with
the above, their analysis also found that expanding firms are likely to have more financial
leverage than contracting enterprises.

Issues Relating to Rules for Classifying Cash Flows

While the SCF is less able to be manipulated than income, it is not exempt from the
problem.32 Cash flow from operations is considered by many to be the most important part of
the SCF, and many users focus on it. Consequently, considerable activity is devoted to
increasing cash flows from operations by shifting cash outflows from operating activities to
investing activities, or by shifting cash inflows from investing activities to cash inflows from
operating activities.33 While the overall effect on cash remains unchanged, without further
scrutiny, users undoubtedly will view this realignment favorably.

Maremont offers an example of this problem involving Tyco International, a seller of home
security alarm systems.34 Customers pay approximately $30 a month for these services, and
the contracts often extend beyond a year. Tyco sells these services itself, but it also buys
service contracts from other dealers. It seems that cash expended by Tyco to develop home
security alarm sales versus money spent by Tyco to acquire service contracts from other firms
should be treated similarly: (a) cash outflows from operations for portions applicable to home
security alarm sales recognized in income in the current year, and (b) cash outflows for
investments for the portion attributable to revenues to be recognized in future periods. Similar
treatment of purchased contracts and contracts sold directly by Tyco is an example of a well-
merited rigid uniformity.

However, Tyco evidently treats these similar cash flow situations differently. The dealer
contracts purchased by Tyco are treated as “acquisitions” and these cash flows are
recognized on the SCF as cash outflows from operations on a considerably slower basis than
cash outflows from internally generated home security alarm systems. Classificational
inconsistencies of this type on the SCF are not unusual.

Another example of using flexibility in applying FASB ' s classification rules comes from the
automotive industry. In an article from the Wall Street Journal, Mulford relates three such
examples from the automotive industry.35 In these situations, Ford Motor Co., General Motors
Corp., and Harley-Davidson Inc. lent money to dealers in the form of notes receivable so that
the dealers could purchase inventories. The companies recognized the revenue from the
sales but classified the loans as investing activities. This increased reported cash flow from
operating activities by a nontrivial amount. In the General Motors case, reported cash flow
from operating activities was $7.6 billion. If the notes receivable had been treated as an


Page 14 of 31                                                  SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


operating activity instead of as an investing activity, cash flow from operating activities would
have been $3.5 billion.

Contrast this approach with that of Navistar International Corp. While the company ' s captive
subsidiary shows the notes receivable as an investing activity, Navistar ' s consolidated results
reclassify the notes receivable as a part of cash flow from operating activities. Mark Oberle,
Navistar ' s director of investor relations, notes: “At the end of the day, we define ourselves as
a manufacturing company with a finance subsidiary. . . . [The] sale and the associated change
in receivables . . . [is] part of our core business.”36

The upshot is that even when the rules for classifying cash flows are not violated, the
vagueness or flexibility in applying the rules allows companies in the same industry to give
vastly different perspectives to investors and creditors; comparability may be weak at best. A
partial solution to this problem follows.

The SCF Is More Than Cash Flow From Operating Activities

The previous section highlights how flexibility in classification (or even deliberate
misclassification) can affect the perception of the firm ' s financial strength. As we indicated
previously, cash flow from operating activities is considered by many to be the most important
part of the SCF, and many users focus on it.37 The undue attention to one section of the SCF
is problematic. The statement of cash flows consists of three parts, and they are all important.
The following example using WorldCom Inc. illustrates the point.

On July 21, 2002, WorldCom Inc. filed voluntary petitions for reorganization under Chapter 11
of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District
of New York. Prior to filing for bankruptcy, WorldCom had engaged in accounting
irregularities, capitalizing expenses that should have been classified as operating activities.
This misclassification boosted reported cash flow from operating activities and lent credibility
to its net income. While many investors were fooled by WorldCom ' s shenanigans, the SCF '
in its entirety ' gave enough hints to cause investors to be skeptical.

Exhibit 13.6 presents selected items from WorldCom ' s SCF until approximately six months
before the company filed for bankruptcy. Note that net income was positive for the three years
before the firm filed for bankruptcy. A closer look at the SCF gives a different picture, in spite
of the fact the company inflated cash flow from operating activities by misclassifying operating
expenses as investments. If the cash flow from investing activities reflects necessary
investments in the business, the difference between cash flow from operating activities and
cash flow from investing activities provides information on how much cash is (or will be)
available for investors. In WorldCom ' s case, this difference indicates that the company was
hemorrhaging cash in three of the four years before bankruptcy. The cumulative effects
indicate that by December 31, 2001, the company had dug itself a $12 billion hole.

Exhibit 13.6 Selected Items From WorldCom ' s Statement of Cash Flows ($000,000)




Page 15 of 31                                                  SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.




While it is not uncommon for new and growing companies to invest more than they generate
from operations, one might wonder if WorldCom was this type of company. Furthermore, even
if one assumed that all of the investing activities were legitimate, it is logical to question how
long this type of investing activity can continue. In essence, when does the “hole” stop getting
deeper and how can WorldCom climb out?

Unfortunately, investors who unduly focused on net income or even cash flow from operating
activities probably did not ask that question. In its entirety, the SCF paints a valuable picture
of the net cash flow generating ability of a business. Investors who ignore one or more parts
do so at their peril.

Cash Flow Needs of Different Users

In his 1988 letter to the shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway (BRKA), Warren Buffett
summarized what needs to be reported for users of financial statements.

     What needs to be reported is data . . . that helps financially-literate readers answer
     three key questions: (1) Approximately how much is this company worth? (2) What is
     the likelihood that it can meet its future obligations? and (3) How good a job are its
     managers doing, given the hand they have been dealt?38

In essence, the financial statements need to provide the information for valuing the company,
making credit decisions, and assessing managerial performance. Assessing managerial
performance requires accurate measures of historical cash flows.39 Credit and valuation
decisions require unbiased predictions of future cash flows, in line with SFAC No. 1.40

Investment decisions are particularly dependent on predicting future cash flows.41 Investing is
a capital allocation decision. In principle, the accepted decision criterion is the same criterion
used for capital budgeting decisions. For capital budgeting purposes, firms should accept an
investment if the present value of the expected net cash flows is positive.42 That is, accept
the investment if the net present value (NPV) is positive.

Similarly, a stock purchase is acceptable if the per-share present value of the future expected
cash flows ' intrinsic value ' is greater than the current market price. Most investment
professionals recognize this.43 For example, in discussing intrinsic value in Berkshire
Hathaway ' s “An Owner ' s Manual,” Warren Buffett, one of the world ' s preeminent and
best-known investors, notes:



Page 16 of 31                                                  SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                   SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


     Intrinsic value is an all-important concept that offers the only logical approach to
     evaluating the relative attractiveness of investments and businesses. Intrinsic value
     can be defined simply: It is the discounted value of the cash that can be taken out of
     a business during its remaining life. The calculation of intrinsic value, though, is not
     so simple. As our definition suggests, intrinsic value is an estimate rather than a
     precise figure, and it is additionally an estimate that must be changed if interest rates
     move or forecasts of future cash flows are revised.44

The question is: What cash flows do we use to determine intrinsic value? In principle, the
definition of the cash flows used for valuing the business enterprise is the same as that used
for capital budgeting purposes. However, in the case of the firm, the cash flows are called free
cash flows (FCFs). Mulford and Comiskey note, “The term ‘free ' refers to an absence of a
superior claim. It is cash flow that is available for use with no strings attached. Spending it will
not affect the firm ' s ability to generate more.”45

They document the increasing attention to free cash flow in the financial press, most likely
due to a “reaction to the numerous and well-publicized accounting problems and examples of
egregious acts of earnings management witnessed in recent years.” Mulford and Comiskey
view the increasing popularity of free cash flows positively:

     We welcome the growing attention placed on free cash flow. We think that it provides
     evidence that investors and creditors are emphasizing what really matters to analysis
     and valuation.46

Mulford and Comiskey point out that there are several definitions of free cash flow used by
companies and in the financial press. Following the entity theory of the firm, we focus on cash
flow to the firm.47 Unfortunately, FCFs cannot be obtained directly from the SCF. They are
defined as follows.

(13.2)



NOPLAT is net operating profit less adjusted taxes. In a simple case, NOPLAT is after-tax
operating income.48 Investment in operating invested capital is typically broken down into
investment in net operating working capital and investment in noncurrent assets.

Note that FCFs do not include interest expense, a financing expense.49 Furthermore,
consistent with the notion of an ongoing firm, operating cash is regarded as part of net
operating working capital, much the same as accounts receivable and inventories.50

We illustrate the construction of FCF and its comparison to the SCF by introducing the ABC
Company. Exhibit 13.7 presents ABC ' s income statement and balance sheet. From these
two statements, we construct an SCF in Exhibit 13.8 and a statement of free cash flows in
Exhibit 13.9.

In Exhibit 13.10, we show how FCFs can be computed from the SCF. Note that we add back
after-tax interest expense to cash flow from operating activities to eliminate the effects of
financing flows in cash flow from operating activities. We also subtract the increase in
operating cash as part of invested capital.


Page 17 of 31                                                   SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                   SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.



Exhibit 13.7 Income Statement and Balance Sheet for ABC Company




Exhibit 13.11 presents a comparison of four performance or valuation measures for ABC
Company. The choice of measure depends on time, resources, and the specific use for the
valuation. In the interest of time, some users can only consider net income. To obtain a better
understanding of the firm ' s operations, and to assess the quality of net income, users can
focus on cash flow from operating activities (CFO). To avoid any potential problems with
classifying operating expenses as investing activities, and to get a sense of the net cash-
generating ability of the firm, it makes sense to subtract cash from investing activities (CFI). As
we have noted previously, CFO is “contaminated” with interest expense (financing).51 To
focus on the operations of the enterprise, and to recognize operating cash itself as a part of
invested capital, we can compute FCFs. Investors can estimate the intrinsic value of the firm
by discounting forecasted FCFs using the firm ' s weighted average cost of capital.52

Exhibit 13.8 Statement of Cash Flows for ABC Company




Page 18 of 31                                                  SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                               SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.




Unfortunately, when considered with net income, we now have four performance measures
that give potentially different views. The real world is never simple.

Exhibit 13.9 Statement of Free Cash Flows for ABC Company




Page 19 of 31                                               SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                            SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.




Exhibit 13.10 Computing Free Cash Flow From the SCF for ABC Company




Page 20 of 31                                            SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                  SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.



Exhibit 13.11 A Comparison of Performance Measures for ABC Company




Cash and Funds Flow Research

Two long-standing advocates of cash flow reporting, Lawson and Lee, have argued that cash
flow reports are necessary to report on the firm ' s performance.53 That is, liquidity (cash flow)
is an integral part of the firm ' s performance. Lee puts it even more strongly: “Cash flow and
not profit is the end result of entity activity. Profit is an abstraction; cash is a physical
resource.”54 Although there is some debate as to whether cash flow reports are superior to
accrual statements or just an important supplement to them, both Lawson and Lee
nevertheless make a strong case. The cash flow valuation model from the financial economics
literature presents a similar viewpoint: Cash flows of the firm are the ultimate determinant of
firm value, not accrual accounting income. However, there is also a growing body of capital
market research evidence that accounting accruals provide information over and above literal
cash flows vis-à-vis the firm ' s security prices.55

One interpretation of this body of research is that cash flows and accruals are more useful
together than either one is alone; that is, both are useful in evaluating the firm ' s performance
and prospects. From this perspective, then, the SCF is complementary to accrual statements,
and the decomposition of accrual data into its cash flow and accrual components provides
new information.

A number of surveys of investors and analysts have consistently shown that cash (funds) flow
data are used for investment analysis but that conventional profitability analysis based on
accrual data dominates over the liquidity focus of cash or funds flow.56 However, a survey
commissioned by the Financial Accounting Foundation found that funds flow data are
increasing in importance while accrual data are decreasing in importance.57 All of this
suggests that cash flow plays an important and perhaps increasing role in assessing overall
firm performance and prospects.58

Improving the SCF

It is clear that the SCF is an important tool for investors, creditors, and managers. While
recognizing its value in its current form, there is room for improvement.

Broome notes that the SCF plays a crucial role in securities analysis. However, reflecting on
the events surrounding the accounting debacles of Adelphia, Dynegy, Qwest, Tyco,
WorldCom, and others, he convincingly argues that the SCF can and should be improved.



Page 21 of 31                                                  SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                   SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.


SFAS No. 95 ' s flexibility in allowing either the direct or the indirect method creates confusion.

     The complicated adjustments required by the indirect method are hard for the reader
     to understand and . . . provide corporate managers more leeway for manipulating the
     statement of cash flows. . . . In many cases, these adjustments cannot be reconciled
     to observed changes in balance sheet accounts. 59

Another issue, which we already noted, deals with the classification of specific cash flows
among the SCF ' s three sections. Given these shortcomings, Broome makes three major
recommendations. First, in light of the fact that both the indirect and direct methods might
have valuable information content, he recommends that “the FASB require the direct method
and [italics added] the associated reconciliation of net income to operating cash flow for the
operating section.”60 Second, the FASB should provide more guidance on classification of
cash flows for the three sections. Finally, he recommends that “the supplementary
reconciliation should begin with cash flow from operations and proceed to net income, which
is the reverse of the current practice in statements of cash flows.”61

We agree with Broome that the direct method should be required.62 However, if the present
system of choice between the direct and indirect method is kept, we think that firms should be
required to provide a schedule showing the noncash flow transactions that affect working
capital accounts.63 This should allow the user to understand the differences between
balance sheet changes and the SCF. Furthermore, in the case of mid-year acquisitions, firms
should provide a schedule that reconciles the working capital adjustments in the operating
section of the SCF with the respective balance sheet changes. In general, a firm should
explain the source of any nonarticulation that occurs in the operating section of the SCF.

Summary

The Statement of Changes in Financial Position was mandated by APB Opinion No. 19 in
1971. The purpose of the statement was to disclose changes in financial position, summarize
financing and investing activity, and report funds flow from operations.

The Statement of Cash Flows is a special case within the more general Statement of Changes
in Financial Position, with funds simply defined to be cash. It is a derivative statement
because it is based on the accounting transactions already summarized in the income
statement and balance sheet. However, new information is reported through the
decomposition of the data into cash flow and accrual components, and through reclassifying
the data into operating flows, net financing flows, and net investment flows.

In SFAS No. 95, the FASB chose to follow the traditional income statement, proprietary
approach rather than the entity model. This leads to issues relating to classification. Interest
expense, interest revenue, and dividend revenue all appear in the operating section, whereas
the related balance sheet items (bonds payable, stock investments, and long-term notes
receivable) are either financing or investing elements. While the entity approach, on its own,
might be more useful, the FASB chose to stay with the traditional income statement model.

Two issues associated with the SCF are nonarticulation and misclassifications. Nonarticulation
refers to the fact that working capital adjustments in the operating section frequently differ
from the changes in the respective balance sheet accounts. It can occur when the indirect
method is used.


Page 22 of 31                                                  SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
SAGE                                                                                SAGE Books
Contact SAGE Publications at http://www.sagepub.com.



One type of misclassification results in mixing financing cash flows (interest expense) with
operating cash flows. Another type of misclassification increases cash flow from operating
activities by shifting certain cash flows to investing activities. International accounting
standards allow flexibility in presentation as long as consistency is maintained.

Research concerning the usefulness to investors of cash and funds flow data is supportive of
the contention that they are informative above and beyond accrual data. Indeed, some argue
that the SCFs are more useful in investment analysis than earnings reports.64 Yet there are
problems with the SCF. Either the direct or indirect method of presenting cash flows from
operations can be chosen. If the direct method is selected, an indirect reconciliation must also
be presented. This led to an almost unanimous selection of the indirect method.

Free cash flows are growing in usage. They might be considered a variant of the statement of
cash flows and are consistent with classifying interest expense as a financing activity.

In spite of the above-mentioned problems, we think that the change from the SCFP to the
SCF has brought about a greater consistency among firms. In addition, we think that it
provides information that is useful for predictive purposes and enhances comparability. We
expect the SCF to become increasingly more important to users because it does not contain
the “arbitrariness” of the income statement.

Questions

    1. How does the all-inclusive or all-resources approach to the SCFP with funds defined as
       working capital differ from the older funds flow statement?
    2. SFAS No. 95 allows a choice between the direct and the indirect method for calculating
       the operations section of the SCF. Do you think this is a case of flexibility? Explain.
    3. What is the “fineness” issue raised by Nurnberg and Largay relative to accounting for
       hedging transactions in SFAS No. 104?
    4. Does the “fineness” issue arise in the handling of capitalized interest costs (SFAS No.
       34) relative to the treatment of this item in SFAS No. 95? Explain.
    5. What advantages do you see for classifying interest expense as an investing cash flow
       rather than an operating cash flow? What is the advantage of classifying it as an
       operating cash flow? What is the advantage of classifying it as a financing cash flow?
    6. Explain how cash flow data complement the income statement and balance sheet.
    7. What is the “quality of income” concept, and how does cash flow reporting relate to it?
    8. What attribute is being measured in the SCF, and how well is representational
       faithfulness achieved? Compare this to when funds are defined as working capital.
    9. Why is the three-way classification system in the SCF more informative than the two-
       way source/use classification?
   10. How does the source/use classification reflect the structure of double-entry
       accounting?
   11. What is the purpose of reporting noncash items in the SCF?
   12. Why is the SCF called a derivative statement?
   13. What do research findings indicate concerning the relevance of cash and funds flow
       data?
   14. What does it mean to classify a cash flow according to the basic nature or function of
       the event as opposed to the ultimate purpose of the transaction? Which method do you
       prefer?
   15. Reexamine Exhibit 13.11. Explain the purpose of each performance measure. As a


Page 23 of 31                                                SAGE Books - Statement of Cash Flows
